challenge.md, before:

# Data Science Unit 3 Sprint Challenge 2

## Databases and SQL

A SQL Query walks into a bar. In one corner of the bar are two tables. The Query
walks up to the tables and asks:

...

*"Mind if I join you?"*

---

In this sprint challenge you will write code and answer questions related to
databases, with a focus on SQL but an acknowledgment of the broader ecosystem.
You may use any tools and references you wish, but your final code should
reflect *your* work and be saved in `.py` files (*not* notebooks), and (along
with this file including your written answers) added to your
`DS-Unit-3-Sprint-2-SQL-and-Databases` repo.

For all your code, you may only import/use the following:
- other modules you write
- `sqlite3` (from the standard library)

As always, make sure to manage your time - get a section/question to "good
enough" and then move on to make sure you do everything. You can always revisit
and polish at the end if time allows.

This file is Markdown, so it may be helpful to add/commit/push it first so you
can view it all nice and rendered on GitHub.

Good luck!

### Part 1 - Making and populating a Database

Consider the following data:

| s   | x | y |
|-----|---|---|
| 'g' | 3 | 9 |
| 'v' | 5 | 7 |
| 'f' | 8 | 7 |

Using the standard `sqlite3` module:

- Open a connection to a new (blank) database file `demo_data.sqlite3`
- Make a cursor, and execute an appropriate `CREATE TABLE` statement to accept
  the above data (name the table `demo`)
- Write and execute appropriate `INSERT INTO` statements to add the data (as
  shown above) to the database

Make sure to `commit()` so your data is saved! The file size should be non-zero.

Then write the following queries (also with `sqlite3`) to test:

- Count how many rows you have - it should be 3!
- How many rows are there where both `x` and `y` are at least 5?
- How many unique values of `y` are there (hint - `COUNT()` can accept a keyword
  `DISTINCT`)?

Your code (to reproduce all above steps) should be saved in `demo_data.py` and
added to the repository along with the generated SQLite database.

### Part 2 - The Northwind Database

Using `sqlite3`, connect to the given `northwind_small.sqlite3` database.

![Northwind Entity-Relationship Diagram](./northwind_erd.png)

Above is an entity-relationship diagram - a picture summarizing the schema and
relationships in the database. Note that it was generated using Microsoft
Access, and some of the specific table/field names are different in the provided
data. You can see all the tables available to SQLite as follows:

```python
>>> curs.execute("SELECT name FROM sqlite_master WHERE type='table' ORDER BY
name;").fetchall()
[('Category',), ('Customer',), ('CustomerCustomerDemo',),
('CustomerDemographic',), ('Employee',), ('EmployeeTerritory',), ('Order',),
('OrderDetail',), ('Product',), ('Region',), ('Shipper',), ('Supplier',),
('Territory',)]
```

Unlike the diagram, the tables in SQLite are singular and not plural (do not end
in `s`). And you can see the schema (`CREATE TABLE` statement) behind any given
table with:
```python
>>> curs.execute('SELECT sql FROM sqlite_master WHERE name="Customer";').fetchall()
[('CREATE TABLE "Customer" \n(\n  "Id" VARCHAR(8000) PRIMARY KEY, \n
"CompanyName" VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "ContactName" VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n
"ContactTitle" VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "Address" VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "City"
VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "Region" VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "PostalCode"
VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "Country" VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "Phone" VARCHAR(8000)
NULL, \n  "Fax" VARCHAR(8000) NULL \n)',)]
```

In particular note that the *primary* key is `Id`, and not `CustomerId`. On
other tables (where it is a *foreign* key) it will be `CustomerId`. Also note -
the `Order` table conflicts with the `ORDER` keyword! We'll just avoid that
particular table, but it's a good lesson in the danger of keyword conflicts.

Answer the following questions (each is from a single table):

- What are the ten most expensive items (per unit price) in the database?
- What is the average age of an employee at the time of their hiring? (Hint: a
  lot of arithmetic works with dates.)
- (*Stretch*) How does the average age of employee at hire vary by city?

Your code (to load and query the data) should be saved in `northwind.py`, and
added to the repository. Do your best to answer in purely SQL, but if necessary
use Python/other logic to help.

### Part 3 - Sailing the Northwind Seas

You've answered some basic questions from the Northwind database, looking at
individual tables - now it's time to put things together, and `JOIN`!

Using `sqlite3` in `northwind.py`, answer the following:

- What are the ten most expensive items (per unit price) in the database *and*
  their suppliers?
- What is the largest category (by number of products in it)?
- (*Stretch*) What are the top territory (by number of employees), and
  how many employees do they have?

### Part 4 - Questions (and your Answers)

Answer the following questions, baseline ~3-5 sentences each, as if they were
interview screening questions (a form you fill when applying for a job):

- In the Northwind database, what is the type of relationship between the
  `Employee` and `Territory` tables?
- What is a situation where a document store (like MongoDB) is appropriate, and
  what is a situation where it is not appropriate?
- (*Stretch*) What is "NewSQL", and what is it trying to achieve?

The relationship between the Employee and Territory tables is one-to-many. One employee can have multiple territories. Each territory has one employee.

A situation where a document store can be appropriate is when there aren't complex relationships among the data. Anything that can fit into one table can be appropriate for a document store such as MongoDB. Items that would work on one table can easily be stored in a dictionary. A document store is just a series of dictionaries.

A situation where a document store is not appropriate is when handling bank or credit card applications. What makes SQL databases so great for bank data is that they guarantee ACID--Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, and Durability. These are all important for bank data. A document store would not guarantee ACID, so it would not be appropriat for a bank to use.

### Part 5 - Turn it in!
Add all the files you wrote (`demo_data.py`, `northwind.py`), as well
as this file with your answers to part 7, to your weekly repo
(`DS-Unit-3-Sprint-2-SQL-and-Databases`). Commit, push, and await feedback from
your PM. Thanks for your hard work!

If you got this far, check out the [larger Northwind
database](https://github.com/jpwhite3/northwind-SQLite3/blob/master/Northwind_large.sqlite.zip) -
your queries should run on it as well, with richer results.

Commit message:

Update with answers to stretch questions

challenge.md, after:

# Data Science Unit 3 Sprint Challenge 2

## Databases and SQL

A SQL Query walks into a bar. In one corner of the bar are two tables. The Query
walks up to the tables and asks:

...

*"Mind if I join you?"*

---

In this sprint challenge you will write code and answer questions related to
databases, with a focus on SQL but an acknowledgment of the broader ecosystem.
You may use any tools and references you wish, but your final code should
reflect *your* work and be saved in `.py` files (*not* notebooks), and (along
with this file including your written answers) added to your
`DS-Unit-3-Sprint-2-SQL-and-Databases` repo.

For all your code, you may only import/use the following:
- other modules you write
- `sqlite3` (from the standard library)

As always, make sure to manage your time - get a section/question to "good
enough" and then move on to make sure you do everything. You can always revisit
and polish at the end if time allows.

This file is Markdown, so it may be helpful to add/commit/push it first so you
can view it all nice and rendered on GitHub.

Good luck!

### Part 1 - Making and populating a Database

Consider the following data:

| s   | x | y |
|-----|---|---|
| 'g' | 3 | 9 |
| 'v' | 5 | 7 |
| 'f' | 8 | 7 |

Using the standard `sqlite3` module:

- Open a connection to a new (blank) database file `demo_data.sqlite3`
- Make a cursor, and execute an appropriate `CREATE TABLE` statement to accept
  the above data (name the table `demo`)
- Write and execute appropriate `INSERT INTO` statements to add the data (as
  shown above) to the database

Make sure to `commit()` so your data is saved! The file size should be non-zero.

Then write the following queries (also with `sqlite3`) to test:

- Count how many rows you have - it should be 3!
- How many rows are there where both `x` and `y` are at least 5?
- How many unique values of `y` are there (hint - `COUNT()` can accept a keyword
  `DISTINCT`)?

Your code (to reproduce all above steps) should be saved in `demo_data.py` and
added to the repository along with the generated SQLite database.

### Part 2 - The Northwind Database

Using `sqlite3`, connect to the given `northwind_small.sqlite3` database.

![Northwind Entity-Relationship Diagram](./northwind_erd.png)

Above is an entity-relationship diagram - a picture summarizing the schema and
relationships in the database. Note that it was generated using Microsoft
Access, and some of the specific table/field names are different in the provided
data. You can see all the tables available to SQLite as follows:

```python
>>> curs.execute("SELECT name FROM sqlite_master WHERE type='table' ORDER BY
name;").fetchall()
[('Category',), ('Customer',), ('CustomerCustomerDemo',),
('CustomerDemographic',), ('Employee',), ('EmployeeTerritory',), ('Order',),
('OrderDetail',), ('Product',), ('Region',), ('Shipper',), ('Supplier',),
('Territory',)]
```

Unlike the diagram, the tables in SQLite are singular and not plural (do not end
in `s`). And you can see the schema (`CREATE TABLE` statement) behind any given
table with:
```python
>>> curs.execute('SELECT sql FROM sqlite_master WHERE name="Customer";').fetchall()
[('CREATE TABLE "Customer" \n(\n  "Id" VARCHAR(8000) PRIMARY KEY, \n
"CompanyName" VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "ContactName" VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n
"ContactTitle" VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "Address" VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "City"
VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "Region" VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "PostalCode"
VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "Country" VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "Phone" VARCHAR(8000)
NULL, \n  "Fax" VARCHAR(8000) NULL \n)',)]
```

In particular note that the *primary* key is `Id`, and not `CustomerId`. On
other tables (where it is a *foreign* key) it will be `CustomerId`. Also note -
the `Order` table conflicts with the `ORDER` keyword! We'll just avoid that
particular table, but it's a good lesson in the danger of keyword conflicts.

Answer the following questions (each is from a single table):

- What are the ten most expensive items (per unit price) in the database?
- What is the average age of an employee at the time of their hiring? (Hint: a
  lot of arithmetic works with dates.)
- (*Stretch*) How does the average age of employee at hire vary by city?

Your code (to load and query the data) should be saved in `northwind.py`, and
added to the repository. Do your best to answer in purely SQL, but if necessary
use Python/other logic to help.

### Part 3 - Sailing the Northwind Seas

You've answered some basic questions from the Northwind database, looking at
individual tables - now it's time to put things together, and `JOIN`!

Using `sqlite3` in `northwind.py`, answer the following:

- What are the ten most expensive items (per unit price) in the database *and*
  their suppliers?
- What is the largest category (by number of products in it)?
- (*Stretch*) Who's the employee with the most territories, and
  how many territories do they have?

### Part 4 - Questions (and your Answers)

Answer the following questions, baseline ~3-5 sentences each, as if they were
interview screening questions (a form you fill when applying for a job):

- In the Northwind database, what is the type of relationship between the
  `Employee` and `Territory` tables?
- What is a situation where a document store (like MongoDB) is appropriate, and
  what is a situation where it is not appropriate?
- (*Stretch*) What is "NewSQL", and what is it trying to achieve?

The relationship between the Employee and Territory tables is one-to-many. One employee can have multiple territories. Each territory has one employee.

A situation where a document store can be appropriate is when there aren't complex relationships among the data. Anything that can fit into one table can be appropriate for a document store such as MongoDB. Items that would work on one table can easily be stored in a dictionary. A document store is just a series of dictionaries.

A situation where a document store is not appropriate is when handling bank or credit card applications. What makes SQL databases so great for bank data is that they guarantee ACID--Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, and Durability. These are all important for bank data. A document store would not guarantee ACID, so it would not be appropriat for a bank to use.

NewSQL is a class of modern relational database systems that attempts to provide the scalable performance of NoSQL while maintaining the ACID guarantees of traditional relational databases. Traditional SQL is limited by the capacity of a single machine due to the need for the data to be connected among multiple tables. NoSQL doesn't have such a limitation, so it is more scalable. However, NoSQL doesn't have ACID guarantees. NewSQL is an attempt to get a balance of both scalability and ACID guarantees.

### Part 5 - Turn it in!
Add all the files you wrote (`demo_data.py`, `northwind.py`), as well
as this file with your answers to part 7, to your weekly repo
(`DS-Unit-3-Sprint-2-SQL-and-Databases`). Commit, push, and await feedback from
your PM. Thanks for your hard work!

If you got this far, check out the [larger Northwind
database](https://github.com/jpwhite3/northwind-SQLite3/blob/master/Northwind_large.sqlite.zip) -
your queries should run on it as well, with richer results.
