1. In the northwind database, the relationship between the 'employee' and 'territory' tables is that the 'employee' tabe's primary key is 'id' (employee id) which is also represented in the table 'employee territories' which also contains 'territory_id.' By the 'employee territories' table having both an employee id and a territory id for each instance, this allows you to use the 'employee territories' table as an intermediary between the 'Employees' table and the 'Territories' Table. 

2. A situation where a document store like Mongodb is appropriate would be if you wanted to store vast amounts of data that does not have to be relational. The example Aaron used was an app for storing news stories. This could allow you to store stories and certain features of them such as the author and date, but they would not have to relate to the others. This is also the preferred method for storing 'Big Data.' An example where Mongodb might not be as appropriate would be if you wanted to store small to moderate amounts of highly relational data that would have to be frequently updated. A good example of this would be financial records or transactions. 

3. NewSQL is a relatively new variety of databases that still use SQL while seeking to provide both scalability and ACID guarantees. By having both the scalability and the qualities of ACID, NewSQL DBs seek to allow users who need extremely robust methodology to guarantee accurate record keeping to not sacrifice the ability to scale. The example Aaron used was financial institutions because they need to process large amounts of highly relational data, but they need the transactions to be accurately reflected in their DBs with perfect accuracy. 