Unit 3 Sprint 2 Challenge/challenge.md, before:

# Data Science Unit 3 Sprint Challenge 2

## Databases and SQL

A SQL Query walks into a bar. In one corner of the bar are two tables. The Query
walks up to the tables and asks:

...

*"Mind if I join you?"*

---

In this sprint challenge you will write code and answer questions related to
databases, with a focus on SQL but an acknowledgment of the broader ecosystem.
You may use any tools and references you wish, but your final code should
reflect *your* work and be saved in `.py` files (*not* notebooks), and (along
with this file including your written answers) added to your
`DS-Unit-3-Sprint-2-SQL-and-Databases` repo.

For all your code, you may only import/use the following:
- other modules you write
- `sqlite3` (from the standard library)

As always, make sure to manage your time - get a section/question to "good
enough" and then move on to make sure you do everything. You can always revisit
and polish at the end if time allows.

This file is Markdown, so it may be helpful to add/commit/push it first so you
can view it all nice and rendered on GitHub.

Good luck!

### Part 1 - Making and populating a Database

Consider the following data:

| s   | x | y |
|-----|---|---|
| 'g' | 3 | 9 |
| 'v' | 5 | 7 |
| 'f' | 8 | 7 |

Using the standard `sqlite3` module:

- Open a connection to a new (blank) database file `demo_data.sqlite3`
- Make a cursor, and execute an appropriate `CREATE TABLE` statement to accept
  the above data (name the table `demo`)
- Write and execute appropriate `INSERT INTO` statements to add the data (as
  shown above) to the database

Make sure to `commit()` so your data is saved! The file size should be non-zero.

Then write the following queries (also with `sqlite3`) to test:

- Count how many rows you have - it should be 3!
- How many rows are there where both `x` and `y` are at least 5?
- How many unique values of `y` are there (hint - `COUNT()` can accept a keyword
  `DISTINCT`)?

Your code (to reproduce all above steps) should be saved in `demo_data.py` and
added to the repository along with the generated SQLite database.

### Part 2 - The Northwind Database

Using `sqlite3`, connect to the given `northwind_small.sqlite3` database.

![Northwind Entity-Relationship Diagram](./northwind_erd.png)

Above is an entity-relationship diagram - a picture summarizing the schema and
relationships in the database. Note that it was generated using Microsoft
Access, and some of the specific table/field names are different in the provided
data. You can see all the tables available to SQLite as follows:

```python
>>> curs.execute("SELECT name FROM sqlite_master WHERE type='table' ORDER BY
name;").fetchall()
[('Category',), ('Customer',), ('CustomerCustomerDemo',),
('CustomerDemographic',), ('Employee',), ('EmployeeTerritory',), ('Order',),
('OrderDetail',), ('Product',), ('Region',), ('Shipper',), ('Supplier',),
('Territory',)]
```

*Warning*: unlike the diagram, the tables in SQLite are singular and not plural
(do not end in `s`). And you can see the schema (`CREATE TABLE` statement)
behind any given table with:
```python
>>> curs.execute('SELECT sql FROM sqlite_master WHERE name="Customer";').fetchall()
[('CREATE TABLE "Customer" \n(\n  "Id" VARCHAR(8000) PRIMARY KEY, \n
"CompanyName" VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "ContactName" VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n
"ContactTitle" VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "Address" VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "City"
VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "Region" VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "PostalCode"
VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "Country" VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "Phone" VARCHAR(8000)
NULL, \n  "Fax" VARCHAR(8000) NULL \n)',)]
```

In particular note that the *primary* key is `Id`, and not `CustomerId`. On
other tables (where it is a *foreign* key) it will be `CustomerId`. Also note -
the `Order` table conflicts with the `ORDER` keyword! We'll just avoid that
particular table, but it's a good lesson in the danger of keyword conflicts.

Answer the following questions (each is from a single table):

- What are the ten most expensive items (per unit price) in the database?
- What is the average age of an employee at the time of their hiring? (Hint: a
  lot of arithmetic works with dates.)
- (*Stretch*) How does the average age of employee at hire vary by city?

Your code (to load and query the data) should be saved in `northwind.py`, and
added to the repository. Do your best to answer in purely SQL, but if necessary
use Python/other logic to help.

### Part 3 - Sailing the Northwind Seas

You've answered some basic questions from the Northwind database, looking at
individual tables - now it's time to put things together, and `JOIN`!

Using `sqlite3` in `northwind.py`, answer the following:

- What are the ten most expensive items (per unit price) in the database *and*
  their suppliers?
- What is the largest category (by number of unique products in it)?
- (*Stretch*) Who's the employee with the most territories? Use `TerritoryId`
  (not name, region, or other fields) as the unique identifier for territories.

### Part 4 - Questions (and your Answers)

Answer the following questions, baseline ~3-5 sentences each, as if they were
interview screening questions (a form you fill when applying for a job):

- In the Northwind database, what is the type of relationship between the
  `Employee` and `Territory` tables?
  ### There seems to be a "many to many" relationship between Employee and Territory. The EmployeeTerritories Table is the link between Employees and Territories, as Employees has EmployeeID, Territory does not and Territory has TerritoryID yet Employees does not.
- What is a situation where a document store (like MongoDB) is appropriate, and what is a situation where it is not appropriate?
 ### An appropriate situation would be where you have a large quantity of data or rapidly growing business database with no clear schema definitions. If a start up is constantly changing their data schemas due to lets say upgrading mobile apps, real-time analytics, etc then a NoSQL or MongoDB is ideal.

 ### If you're an accounting firm or an inventory company that needs a database to be well structured and have static schemas then MongoDB wouldn't be your ideal choice. Or if you need a certain DB that runs on legacy type of systems, then ideally you wouldn't go with MongoDB. 
- What is "NewSQL", and what is it trying to achieve?
### The coolest kid on the block, NewSQL is a class of relational database management systems and seeks to provide scalability, like NoSQL, for online transactions processing workloads while maintaining ACID guarantees of a traditional DB. 
### Part 5 - Turn it in!
Add all the files you wrote (`demo_data.py`, `northwind.py`), as well as this
file with your answers to part 4, to your weekly repo
(`DS-Unit-3-Sprint-2-SQL-and-Databases`). You're also encouraged to include the
output from your queries as docstring comments, to facilitate grading. Commit,
push, and await feedback from your PM. Thanks for your hard work!

If you got this far, check out the [larger Northwind
database](https://github.com/jpwhite3/northwind-SQLite3/blob/master/Northwind_large.sqlite.zip) -
your queries should run on it as well, with richer results.

Commit message:

Added more information for question portion

Unit 3 Sprint 2 Challenge/challenge.md, after:

# Data Science Unit 3 Sprint Challenge 2

## Databases and SQL

A SQL Query walks into a bar. In one corner of the bar are two tables. The Query
walks up to the tables and asks:

...

*"Mind if I join you?"*

---

In this sprint challenge you will write code and answer questions related to
databases, with a focus on SQL but an acknowledgment of the broader ecosystem.
You may use any tools and references you wish, but your final code should
reflect *your* work and be saved in `.py` files (*not* notebooks), and (along
with this file including your written answers) added to your
`DS-Unit-3-Sprint-2-SQL-and-Databases` repo.

For all your code, you may only import/use the following:
- other modules you write
- `sqlite3` (from the standard library)

As always, make sure to manage your time - get a section/question to "good
enough" and then move on to make sure you do everything. You can always revisit
and polish at the end if time allows.

This file is Markdown, so it may be helpful to add/commit/push it first so you
can view it all nice and rendered on GitHub.

Good luck!

### Part 1 - Making and populating a Database

Consider the following data:

| s   | x | y |
|-----|---|---|
| 'g' | 3 | 9 |
| 'v' | 5 | 7 |
| 'f' | 8 | 7 |

Using the standard `sqlite3` module:

- Open a connection to a new (blank) database file `demo_data.sqlite3`
- Make a cursor, and execute an appropriate `CREATE TABLE` statement to accept
  the above data (name the table `demo`)
- Write and execute appropriate `INSERT INTO` statements to add the data (as
  shown above) to the database

Make sure to `commit()` so your data is saved! The file size should be non-zero.

Then write the following queries (also with `sqlite3`) to test:

- Count how many rows you have - it should be 3!
- How many rows are there where both `x` and `y` are at least 5?
- How many unique values of `y` are there (hint - `COUNT()` can accept a keyword
  `DISTINCT`)?

Your code (to reproduce all above steps) should be saved in `demo_data.py` and
added to the repository along with the generated SQLite database.

### Part 2 - The Northwind Database

Using `sqlite3`, connect to the given `northwind_small.sqlite3` database.

![Northwind Entity-Relationship Diagram](./northwind_erd.png)

Above is an entity-relationship diagram - a picture summarizing the schema and
relationships in the database. Note that it was generated using Microsoft
Access, and some of the specific table/field names are different in the provided
data. You can see all the tables available to SQLite as follows:

```python
>>> curs.execute("SELECT name FROM sqlite_master WHERE type='table' ORDER BY
name;").fetchall()
[('Category',), ('Customer',), ('CustomerCustomerDemo',),
('CustomerDemographic',), ('Employee',), ('EmployeeTerritory',), ('Order',),
('OrderDetail',), ('Product',), ('Region',), ('Shipper',), ('Supplier',),
('Territory',)]
```

*Warning*: unlike the diagram, the tables in SQLite are singular and not plural
(do not end in `s`). And you can see the schema (`CREATE TABLE` statement)
behind any given table with:
```python
>>> curs.execute('SELECT sql FROM sqlite_master WHERE name="Customer";').fetchall()
[('CREATE TABLE "Customer" \n(\n  "Id" VARCHAR(8000) PRIMARY KEY, \n
"CompanyName" VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "ContactName" VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n
"ContactTitle" VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "Address" VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "City"
VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "Region" VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "PostalCode"
VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "Country" VARCHAR(8000) NULL, \n  "Phone" VARCHAR(8000)
NULL, \n  "Fax" VARCHAR(8000) NULL \n)',)]
```

In particular note that the *primary* key is `Id`, and not `CustomerId`. On
other tables (where it is a *foreign* key) it will be `CustomerId`. Also note -
the `Order` table conflicts with the `ORDER` keyword! We'll just avoid that
particular table, but it's a good lesson in the danger of keyword conflicts.

Answer the following questions (each is from a single table):

- What are the ten most expensive items (per unit price) in the database?
- What is the average age of an employee at the time of their hiring? (Hint: a
  lot of arithmetic works with dates.)
- (*Stretch*) How does the average age of employee at hire vary by city?

Your code (to load and query the data) should be saved in `northwind.py`, and
added to the repository. Do your best to answer in purely SQL, but if necessary
use Python/other logic to help.

### Part 3 - Sailing the Northwind Seas

You've answered some basic questions from the Northwind database, looking at
individual tables - now it's time to put things together, and `JOIN`!

Using `sqlite3` in `northwind.py`, answer the following:

- What are the ten most expensive items (per unit price) in the database *and*
  their suppliers?
- What is the largest category (by number of unique products in it)?
- (*Stretch*) Who's the employee with the most territories? Use `TerritoryId`
  (not name, region, or other fields) as the unique identifier for territories.

### Part 4 - Questions (and your Answers)

Answer the following questions, baseline ~3-5 sentences each, as if they were
interview screening questions (a form you fill when applying for a job):

- In the Northwind database, what is the type of relationship between the
  `Employee` and `Territory` tables?
  ### There seems to be a "many to many" relationship between Employee and Territory. The EmployeeTerritories Table is the link between Employees and Territories. As Employees has EmployeeID, Territory does not and Territory has TerritoryID yet Employees does not.
- What is a situation where a document store (like MongoDB) is appropriate, and what is a situation where it is not appropriate?
 ### An appropriate situation would be where you have a large quantity of data or rapidly growing business database with no clear schema definitions. If a start up is constantly changing their data schemas due to lets say upgrading mobile apps, real-time analytics, etc then a NoSQL or MongoDB is ideal.

 ### If you're an accounting firm or an inventory company that needs a database to be well structured and have static schemas then MongoDB wouldn't be your ideal choice. Or if you need a certain DB that runs on legacy type of systems, then ideally you wouldn't go with MongoDB. 
 
- What is "NewSQL", and what is it trying to achieve?
### The coolest kid on the block, NewSQL is a class of relational database management systems and seeks to provide scalability, like NoSQL, for online transactions processing workloads while maintaining ACID guarantees of a traditional DB. NewSQL databases are intended for large high profile data, such as financial institutions, and require scalability, but also need more consistency than NoSQL databases can provide. Even though various NewSQL DBs differ in their internal design, they all almost utilize the relational data model and run on SQL. 

### Part 5 - Turn it in!
Add all the files you wrote (`demo_data.py`, `northwind.py`), as well as this
file with your answers to part 4, to your weekly repo
(`DS-Unit-3-Sprint-2-SQL-and-Databases`). You're also encouraged to include the
output from your queries as docstring comments, to facilitate grading. Commit,
push, and await feedback from your PM. Thanks for your hard work!

If you got this far, check out the [larger Northwind
database](https://github.com/jpwhite3/northwind-SQLite3/blob/master/Northwind_large.sqlite.zip) -
your queries should run on it as well, with richer results.
