module2-sql-for-analysis/README.md, before:

# SQL for Analysis

SQL is simple, but surprisingly powerful - many data pipelines start, and even
end, with it.

## Learning Objectives

- deploy and use a simple PostgreSQL database
- Create a data pipeline with SQL

## Before Lecture

Sign up for a free [ElephantSQL](https://www.elephantsql.com/) account. This
will allow you to run a "cloud" PostgreSQL instance (20mb). If you wish to you
may also install [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/) locally, which would
facilitate larger databases, but it is not necessary for the daily tasks.

## Live Lecture Task

Yesterday we used a simple local workflow with SQLite - today, we'll work on
inserting the same RPG data into a more production-style PostgreSQL database
running on a server. We will use [psycopg](http://initd.org/psycopg/), a Python
library for connecting to PostgreSQL, and specifically we will install
[psycopg2-binary](https://pypi.org/project/psycopg2-binary/).

Once we get the data inserted, we will continue exploring querying as yesterday,
first answering the same questions and then going deeper. We'll also explore
some of the specific functions that are different in PostgreSQL than SQLite.

## Assignment

Reproduce (debugging as needed) the live lecture task of setting up and
inserting the RPG data into a PostgreSQL database, and add the code you write to
do so.

Then, set up a new database for the Titanic data (`titanic.csv`) - spend some
time thinking about the schema to make sure it is appropriate for the columns.
[Enumerated types](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.1/datatype-enum.html) may
be useful. Once it is set up, write a `insert_titanic.py` script that uses
`psycopg2` to connect to and upload the data from the csv, and add the file to
your repo.

## Resources and Stretch Goals

PostgreSQL is a real true powerful production database - explore the [official
documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/) as well as larger hosted
offerings such as [Amazon RDS](https://aws.amazon.com/rds/postgresql/).
 
Try to install and use the actual [psycopg2](https://pypi.org/project/psycopg2/)
package (as opposed to `psycop2-binary`) - this builds from source, so there are
[prerequisites](http://initd.org/psycopg/docs/install.html#install-from-source)
you'll need. This may be good to do inside a container!

And if you do all the above, you can revisit
[Django](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.1/intro/) as briefly introduced
yesterday. This is a complete stretch goal (i.e. it's not a core Data Science
skill and is OK if you don't get to it at all), but it is a powerful and
widely-used web application framework. Also, the Django ORM can connect to a
variety of SQL backends, and a very typical setup is to use SQLite for (initial)
local development but PostgreSQL for deployment.

Commit message:

Add pgAdmin link as suggested tool and sample databases link

module2-sql-for-analysis/README.md, after:

# SQL for Analysis

SQL is simple, but surprisingly powerful - many data pipelines start, and even
end, with it.

## Learning Objectives

- deploy and use a simple PostgreSQL database
- Create a data pipeline with SQL

## Before Lecture

Sign up for a free [ElephantSQL](https://www.elephantsql.com/) account. This
will allow you to run a "cloud" PostgreSQL instance (20mb). If you wish to you
may also install [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/) locally, which would
facilitate larger databases, but it is not necessary for the daily tasks.

You can also install [pgAdmin](https://www.pgadmin.org/), which (like the DB
Browser for SQLite) lets you connect to, explore, and query databases using a
GUI tool. This is optional, but can be pretty handy.

## Live Lecture Task

Yesterday we used a simple local workflow with SQLite - today, we'll work on
inserting the same RPG data into a more production-style PostgreSQL database
running on a server. We will use [psycopg](http://initd.org/psycopg/), a Python
library for connecting to PostgreSQL, and specifically we will install
[psycopg2-binary](https://pypi.org/project/psycopg2-binary/).

Once we get the data inserted, we will continue exploring querying as yesterday,
first answering the same questions and then going deeper. We'll also explore
some of the specific functions that are different in PostgreSQL than SQLite.

## Assignment

Reproduce (debugging as needed) the live lecture task of setting up and
inserting the RPG data into a PostgreSQL database, and add the code you write to
do so.

Then, set up a new database for the Titanic data (`titanic.csv`) - spend some
time thinking about the schema to make sure it is appropriate for the columns.
[Enumerated types](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.1/datatype-enum.html) may
be useful. Once it is set up, write a `insert_titanic.py` script that uses
`psycopg2` to connect to and upload the data from the csv, and add the file to
your repo. Then start writing PostgreSQL queries to explore the data!

## Resources and Stretch Goals

PostgreSQL is a real true powerful production database - explore the [official
documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/) as well as larger hosted
offerings such as [Amazon RDS](https://aws.amazon.com/rds/postgresql/).
 
Try to install and use the actual [psycopg2](https://pypi.org/project/psycopg2/)
package (as opposed to `psycop2-binary`) - this builds from source, so there are
[prerequisites](http://initd.org/psycopg/docs/install.html#install-from-source)
you'll need. This may be good to do inside a container!

Want to try larger PostgreSQL databases? Check out [these sample
databases](https://community.embarcadero.com/article/articles-database/1076-top-3-sample-databases-for-postgresql),
but note you'll probably need a local installation of PostgreSQL to be able to
use them.

And if you do all the above, you can revisit
[Django](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.1/intro/) as briefly introduced
yesterday. This is a complete stretch goal (i.e. it's not a core Data Science
skill and is OK if you don't get to it at all), but it is a powerful and
widely-used web application framework. Also, the Django ORM can connect to a
variety of SQL backends, and a very typical setup is to use SQLite for (initial)
local development but PostgreSQL for deployment.
