In the Northwind database, what is the type of relationship between the
`Employee` and `Territory` tables? 

The employee and territory tables are combined by a series of joins that would look like join Territories table to the EmployeeTerritories
and then you can join the Employees table to get which Territory the Employee is in. This could be described as a "many to many" relationship as there can be multiple employees that work in the same territory and and each employee has the possibility to work in multiple territories such a higher up people in the company managing several territories. The other interesting note is that the EmployeeTerritories is composed of only 2 primary key columns to which one connects the Territories table and the other primary key of the EmployeeTerritories table is connected to the Primary key of the Employees table.

What is a situation where a document store (like MongoDB) is appropriate, and
what is a situation where it is not appropriate?

I feel like a very enticing situation to use MongoDB is one where the data you are going to be receiving is input from a survey that is going directly into the database. The fact that your data can be different types and Mongo has no issue with it makes it perfect for something where random people may insert their info differently such as phone numbers. In the case of a relational database, the database really wouldn't like if 99% of people input their phonenumber like 5555555555 and then throughout you had people input their number as 555-555-5555 but Mongo could handle it easier than something like Sqlite. The downside to Mongo is fact that it doesn't support transactions so if you were going to be doing any transactions with your data you either shouldn't use Mongo or you would have to use some run arounds.